docs/security_conop/Operational_Security.rst, before:

Operational Security
====================

This chapter contains SIMP security concepts that are related to the
operational security controls in :term:`NIST 800-53`.

Configuration Management
------------------------

This section describes the management of various configurations within SIMP.

Baseline Configurations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SIMP baselines include configuration settings and Puppet modules.  Currently,
baselines are maintained for both Red Hat/CentOS 6.x, and Red Hat/CentOS 7.x.
Each configuration item that is managed by a Puppet module has an RPM installed
on the Puppet Master in the form of ``pupmod-name-x.x.x-x``. This process
allows for one main SIMP baseline to be maintained and modules to be upgraded
easily. An overall SIMP RPM is also installed on the Puppet Master, which
denotes the version number of SIMP that is installed.
[:ref:`CM-2`, :ref:`CM-2 (2)`, :ref:`CM-2 (3)`, :ref:`CM-6`]

SIMP installs a minimal set of :term:`RPM` packages, which can be found in the
kickstart files on the ISO. RPMs, services, and IPTables rules all use a
whitelist stance for allowing access or installation.
[:ref:`CM-2 (5)`]

* Additional RPMs must be installed by each implementation.
* Services must be declared explicitly or they will be disabled by Puppet
* IPTables rules must allow a service explicitly.

Managing Configuration Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configuration change approvals are managed by each implementation; SIMP only
provides the mechanisms to apply changes on clients. A combination of Puppet,
rsync, and :term:`YUM` is used to apply those changes across any number of
target Puppet clients. All changes made are audited with ``auditd`` or are
logged to via ``syslog``.
[:ref:`CM-3a.`, :ref:`CM-3 (3)`]

Linux systems are made up of hundreds of configuration files that can contain
numerous of settings. SIMP does not make an attempt to manage all of the
settings in every file. Instead, critical operating system files or files that
need to be controlled centrally are managed. Implementations can manage
additional files if they are deemed necessary.
[:ref:`CM-6`]

Security Verification and Flaw Remediation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SIMP cannot detect flaws automatically; each implementation is responsible for
tracking flaws. However, SIMP provides a way for flaws to be fixed across all
clients. One or all of the following can help automate flaw remediation
[:ref:`CM-6`, :ref:`SI-2`, :ref:`SI-2 (1)`, :ref:`SI-2 (4)`]:

*  **Puppet:**

   * Apply a configuration change to files that are managed by Puppet.

*  **rsync:**

   * Use this mechanism to deliver a file to a client. This can be used with or
     without Puppet to synchronize files.

*  **YUM:**

   * Update packages nightly with YUM. Placing an updated package in YUM and
     running a YUM update manually, or allowing time for the cron job to run,
     will ensure packages on all clients are updated.  Otherwise, a cron job
     will perform a daily update of packages with YUM.

*  **MCollective:**

   * Allow users to execute **specific** commands across large numbers of nodes
     in an auditable, distributed, and scalable, fashion.

The extent of security verification that is performed currently is based on
changes to files that Puppet or the Advanced Intrusion Detection Environment
(AIDE) provides. There are also Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP)
profiles available from the SCAP-Security-Guide project that check security
configuration settings.
[:ref:`SI-6`]

Malicious Code Protection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For most environments, SIMP will use ClamAV to protect against malicious code.
Rsync is used to push out new definitions, which should be updated by the local
administrator regularly. SIMP also comes with a ``mcafee::uvscan`` module that
manages an installation of uvscan, if it is preferred. The module can configure
``.dat`` file updates to occur over ``rsync``.

Both the ClamAV and McAfee modules provide a method to run a scan via cron on a
customer scheduled basis.
[:ref:`SI-3`]

SIMP also comes with the ``chkrootkit`` tool to check for *rootkits*. The tool
runs as a cron job and places its output into syslog.
[:ref:`SI-3`]

Software and Information Integrity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unauthorized changes to a local client can be detected by Puppet or AIDE (for
any file managed by Puppet). In the event that a managed file is changed
locally, Puppet will revert the file back to its original state.  It is
important to note that this is a function of Puppet and is intended to be more
of a configuration management feature rather than a security feature. If a
Puppet client has been compromised, the Puppet Master may not have the ability
to retake control over that client.  However, the Puppet Master can configure
all other nodes to deny traffic from the compromised node if they are
configured by the administrator to do so. There are additional configuration
files that are checked by AIDE, which is triggered by a cron job. AIDE logs any
detected file changes in syslog. Each implementation may add additional files
that are managed by Puppet or watched by AIDE. The AIDE baseline database is
updated periodically to handle the installation and updating of system RPMs and
reduce false positives.
[:ref:`SI-7`, :ref:`SI-7 (1)`, :ref:`SI-7 (2)`, :ref:`SI-7 (3)`]

Remote Maintenance
------------------

Remote maintenance can be performed on SIMP using :term:`SSH`. Local
maintenance can be performed at the console or via serial port (if available).
SSH sessions are tracked and logged using the security features built into
SIMP. Console access requires someone to have access to the physical (or
virtual) console along with the ``root`` password. Auditing of those actions
also occurs in accordance with the configured audit policy. It is up to the
implementer to decide how to distribute authentication information for remote
maintenance.
[:ref:`MA-4`, :ref:`MA-4 (1)`, :ref:`MA-6`]

Incident Response
-----------------

While Puppet is not intended to be a security product primarily, its features
help provide security functionality such as dynamic reconfigurations and
wide-scale consistent mitigation application. If an implementation chooses,
they can leverage Puppet's ability to reconfigure systems as part of incident
response.

SIMP also delivers an MCollective infrastructure which can be used to rapidly
query for system state or apply hotfixes in a scalable manner.
[:ref:`IR-1`]

Contingency Planning
--------------------

SIMP does not provide any direct support for contingency planning. Some of the
mechanisms provided by SIMP might be used to support an implementation's
contingency plan.

System Backup
-------------

SIMP comes with a module called ``backuppc``. This module provides a base
configuration of the `BackupPC <http://backuppc.sourceforge.net/>`__ software
and allows Puppet servers and clients to perform backups.
[:ref:`CP-10 (6)`]

Commit message:

(SIMP-3391) Remove references to BackupPC
SIMP-3391 #close

docs/security_conop/Operational_Security.rst, after:

Operational Security
====================

This chapter contains SIMP security concepts that are related to the
operational security controls in :term:`NIST 800-53`.

Configuration Management
------------------------

This section describes the management of various configurations within SIMP.

Baseline Configurations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SIMP baselines include configuration settings and Puppet modules.  Currently,
baselines are maintained for both Red Hat/CentOS 6.x, and Red Hat/CentOS 7.x.
Each configuration item that is managed by a Puppet module has an RPM installed
on the Puppet Master in the form of ``pupmod-name-x.x.x-x``. This process
allows for one main SIMP baseline to be maintained and modules to be upgraded
easily. An overall SIMP RPM is also installed on the Puppet Master, which
denotes the version number of SIMP that is installed.
[:ref:`CM-2`, :ref:`CM-2 (2)`, :ref:`CM-2 (3)`, :ref:`CM-6`]

SIMP installs a minimal set of :term:`RPM` packages, which can be found in the
kickstart files on the ISO. RPMs, services, and IPTables rules all use a
whitelist stance for allowing access or installation.
[:ref:`CM-2 (5)`]

* Additional RPMs must be installed by each implementation.
* Services must be declared explicitly or they will be disabled by Puppet
* IPTables rules must allow a service explicitly.

Managing Configuration Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configuration change approvals are managed by each implementation; SIMP only
provides the mechanisms to apply changes on clients. A combination of Puppet,
rsync, and :term:`YUM` is used to apply those changes across any number of
target Puppet clients. All changes made are audited with ``auditd`` or are
logged to via ``syslog``.
[:ref:`CM-3a.`, :ref:`CM-3 (3)`]

Linux systems are made up of hundreds of configuration files that can contain
numerous of settings. SIMP does not make an attempt to manage all of the
settings in every file. Instead, critical operating system files or files that
need to be controlled centrally are managed. Implementations can manage
additional files if they are deemed necessary.
[:ref:`CM-6`]

Security Verification and Flaw Remediation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

SIMP cannot detect flaws automatically; each implementation is responsible for
tracking flaws. However, SIMP provides a way for flaws to be fixed across all
clients. One or all of the following can help automate flaw remediation
[:ref:`CM-6`, :ref:`SI-2`, :ref:`SI-2 (1)`, :ref:`SI-2 (4)`]:

*  **Puppet:**

   * Apply a configuration change to files that are managed by Puppet.

*  **rsync:**

   * Use this mechanism to deliver a file to a client. This can be used with or
     without Puppet to synchronize files.

*  **YUM:**

   * Update packages nightly with YUM. Placing an updated package in YUM and
     running a YUM update manually, or allowing time for the cron job to run,
     will ensure packages on all clients are updated.  Otherwise, a cron job
     will perform a daily update of packages with YUM.

*  **MCollective:**

   * Allow users to execute **specific** commands across large numbers of nodes
     in an auditable, distributed, and scalable, fashion.

The extent of security verification that is performed currently is based on
changes to files that Puppet or the Advanced Intrusion Detection Environment
(AIDE) provides. There are also Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP)
profiles available from the SCAP-Security-Guide project that check security
configuration settings.
[:ref:`SI-6`]

Malicious Code Protection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For most environments, SIMP will use ClamAV to protect against malicious code.
Rsync is used to push out new definitions, which should be updated by the local
administrator regularly. SIMP also comes with a ``mcafee::uvscan`` module that
manages an installation of uvscan, if it is preferred. The module can configure
``.dat`` file updates to occur over ``rsync``.

Both the ClamAV and McAfee modules provide a method to run a scan via cron on a
customer scheduled basis.
[:ref:`SI-3`]

SIMP also comes with the ``chkrootkit`` tool to check for *rootkits*. The tool
runs as a cron job and places its output into syslog.
[:ref:`SI-3`]

Software and Information Integrity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unauthorized changes to a local client can be detected by Puppet or AIDE (for
any file managed by Puppet). In the event that a managed file is changed
locally, Puppet will revert the file back to its original state.  It is
important to note that this is a function of Puppet and is intended to be more
of a configuration management feature rather than a security feature. If a
Puppet client has been compromised, the Puppet Master may not have the ability
to retake control over that client.  However, the Puppet Master can configure
all other nodes to deny traffic from the compromised node if they are
configured by the administrator to do so. There are additional configuration
files that are checked by AIDE, which is triggered by a cron job. AIDE logs any
detected file changes in syslog. Each implementation may add additional files
that are managed by Puppet or watched by AIDE. The AIDE baseline database is
updated periodically to handle the installation and updating of system RPMs and
reduce false positives.
[:ref:`SI-7`, :ref:`SI-7 (1)`, :ref:`SI-7 (2)`, :ref:`SI-7 (3)`]

Remote Maintenance
------------------

Remote maintenance can be performed on SIMP using :term:`SSH`. Local
maintenance can be performed at the console or via serial port (if available).
SSH sessions are tracked and logged using the security features built into
SIMP. Console access requires someone to have access to the physical (or
virtual) console along with the ``root`` password. Auditing of those actions
also occurs in accordance with the configured audit policy. It is up to the
implementer to decide how to distribute authentication information for remote
maintenance.
[:ref:`MA-4`, :ref:`MA-4 (1)`, :ref:`MA-6`]

Incident Response
-----------------

While Puppet is not intended to be a security product primarily, its features
help provide security functionality such as dynamic reconfigurations and
wide-scale consistent mitigation application. If an implementation chooses,
they can leverage Puppet's ability to reconfigure systems as part of incident
response.

SIMP also delivers an MCollective infrastructure which can be used to rapidly
query for system state or apply hotfixes in a scalable manner.
[:ref:`IR-1`]

Contingency Planning
--------------------

SIMP does not provide any direct support for contingency planning. Some of the
mechanisms provided by SIMP might be used to support an implementation's
contingency plan.

System Backup and Recovery
--------------------------

SIMP does not directly support system backup and recovery―solutions vary
widely, and should be determined as part of an implementation's broader
contingency plan. SIMP provides some mechanisms that might be used to support
backup and recovery procedures.

Administrators seeking FOSS software to implement backup and recovery may be
interested in products such as `Bacula <https://www.bacula.org/>`__, `BackupPC
<http://backuppc.sourceforge.net/>`__, `duplicity
<http://duplicity.nongnu.org/>`__, and `scat
<https://github.com/Roman2K/scat>`__.
